In this video we will learn about Structures. Structure can be defined as a collection of data members
that are related data members under one name; and those data members may be of similar type, maybe of
dissimilar type.
So usually it is defined as a collection of dissimilar data items under one name; that is grouping the
data items.
Structure is used for defining user defined data types. Apart from the primitive data types,
What we have in any programming language, like C language, we have primitive data types, like integer, float,
double so on, using these primitives we can define our own data type depending on our requirement.
So this is structure I am using more frequently in my course.
So in this video we will learn how to define the structure and what does it mean by the size of a structure,
like how much memory it consumes then building a structure then accessing the members of a structure.
Let us learn about these things one by one.
Let us take an example of a rectangle. A rectangular figure will have properties like length and breadth.
So it will have length and breadth, these two things together defines a rectangle.
So if in your programs you need something like a rectangle then you can define the structure for it
because a rectangle is not defined by just one value,
It is defined by a set of values.
So that is length and breadth so you can group them together under one name and define it as a structure.
For example a rectangle.
So, here I define, struct rectangle
now, inside this, I will take integer type length, and integer type breadth
Now this is having two members that are length and breadth.
I'm picking them as integer type.
If you want you can take them as float or double any type depending on your requirement.
I'm assuming that these are simple values which are integral type, no decimals are there.
So structure rectangle is defined by its length and breadth; These two members together are defining
a rectangle.
So this is the definition of a structure.
I have taken an example of rectangle.
I'll be showing you more examples upon structures later on.
So let us learn further about this one.
Now how much memory this rectangle will be consuming?
See it is having two members this land integer type.
If I assume integer takes 2 bytes, or it may take 4 bytes but, I'm assuming it has 2 bytes. Now, breadth
also takes 2 bytes, total it is 4 bytes of memory. So, this structure is taking 4 bytes
of memory.
Right now it's not consuming any memory because it is just our definition.
So if I create a variable of this type then it will be occupying that much memory.
Now we have seen how do we define.
We have learned how to know its size. The size of a structure is the total amount of memory consumed
by all its members.
Now next let us learn how to declare a variable of that type structure.
So inside the main ( ) , I will write down main ( ). Now, inside the mean ( ) ,
If I declare a variable, so the method of declaration is write,
Struct as a keyword then give the name rectangle.
Then I'll give the name as r.
Rectangle r.
This is a declaration.
Now, this r will occupy the memory space, right.
This will be created in the memory.
So, how it looks like? like r is of type triangle, so it is having 2 members that is length and breadth, so
r will occupy a total of 4 bytes, and first 2 bytes are for length and next 2 bytes are for breadth.
So yes that is occupying memory.
This is a method of declaration.
Now, if suppose, I want to initialize it, then I can declare and simultaneously I can initialize it.
So let us say, struct, I will rewrite the same thing, I will say rectangle.
I'll use the same name r with values, I can say 10 , 5 .
So, length is 10 and breadth is 5, so, 10 and 5 will be filled in this one.
So this is how we can declare as well as initialize
.
This is just a declaration, right; and this is declaration plus initialization, together.
This is a declaration plus initialization
then, inside the main memory, if you want to see where this r is created,
So it is created inside the stack for the main ( ) , is it inside the stack frame of main ( ) .
So r will be having length and breadth, this is length and breadth,
And this is 10 and 5.
So I'm showing them side by side.
So we have learned definition,
declaration and initialization. Now, how to access the members of the structure? Suppose, I want to access
this length.,
I want to modify it to 15. So, for accessing the members of a structure we should use structure variable name
and dot length.
So this is length = 15, so this value will be changed to 15, right; so, it is change to 15 in the memory.
So this is how we can access,
So what is the operator we use for accessing a member? dot operator is used for accessing a member. Then, r . breadth ,
I can modify it, r . breadth = 10 .
So this is modified to 10. So, if you want to read or write the members of a structure dot operator is
used. Here I will calculate the area of a rectangle and show you, so directly I will print that as
printf (" Area of Rectangle is %d",
printf ("Area of Rectangle is %d",
So here, I will write the formula.
So, what is the formula for area? length*breadth .
So how to access that length and breadth? I have to use the dot operator. So, say,
r . length * r . breadth
So this is how I can access the members. So, length and breadth will be multiplied, that is 15 * 10
and I get the result is 150. So, that's it
about the structure, this is sufficient and more about the structures, I will discuss when I talk about
pointers and functions.
So this was just the introduction to structure.
So let us continue with other topics in the next videos.
So that's it. We have learnt about how to define, how to declare and how to access the members and where it is created
in the memory when you are directly creating or declaring it inside the main ( ) .
declaration and initialization is like this when it is done. So, it's inside the stack frame of that particular
function.
Now I will give you a few more examples of structure. So, I will write down few more structures to give you the idea
how or where we can use structures. Let us look at the example,
So the first example I will write a complex number.
So complex number in mathematics is defined
in terms of a + ib , where i is an imaginary number.
So, two real numbers are a and b.
where, i is defined as root of -1.
So if you are familiar with the complex number then you can understand this, otherwise, just you can Google
it and find out what a complex number is. So, complex number is defined in terms of a + ib
So we need two members A and B. So, complex number is defined in terms of two elements.
So that you can group them and define this structure.
So here we can define it as structure, struct complex , and inside, that we can have two members.
One is a, or I can call it as real part.
And second one is imaginary, I can name it as b or also I can call it as imaginary that is img .
This is our definition.
Now you can define a complex number like this and you can create the variables of complex numbers and
you can use them in your program. if you need this complex number. Now, second example I will take an example
of a student,
Suppose your program is dealing with students' information.
So for a student we can define a structure structure for us to then make and then the details of a student.
So let us say I want to store the roll number of a student.
And suppose a  roll number is integer type.
Next I want to store the name of a student.
So name of a student is a string.
So I will have an array of type character for name.
Let us reserve 25 spaces, so it can store a name up to 25 characters.
Next thing, I want to store department of students, so department is also a name.
So it's a character type.
Let us give the name of size 10, like computer science or mechanical engineering or anything you can
give a short form of the department name.
Next, I want to store the address of a student, so address,
I can take it as, of some size, let us say, 50 bytes, right.
So I think it is sufficient. If you want to add, you can add many things, like the phone number of a student,
and email address of a student, Date of Birth of a student, a lot of things you can add, so that all together
forms a single student structure. And when you declare a variable you get all these things together
and you can access each of them individually using dot operator.
So this is another idea of a structure.
Now if I calculate the amount of memory it is taking, like if I said this is 2 bytes and 2 bytes,
So this is taking total 4 bytes, and if I take this one, this is integer, taking 2 bytes.
So this is character type, 25 characters take 25 bytes because character takes just 1 byte
and this 10 bytes,
and this is 50 bytes,
So this is total 77.
So this is taking 77 bytes.
So this is another example.
This is just for a student, you can define it for an employee so you can have employee id, employee name,
employee department, employee address, employee phone number, so on. Then, if you want to define a structure
for a book, you can give book title, book author name, book version or edition, then year of publication and so on.
So, you can have all the members. So, a lot of data you can combine together under one name and when you
declare a variable of type student, suppose, for example for this,
If I do further, then this is a variable I am declaring, struct student s . So, I can say, s . roll
I can set the roll number. Let us say roll number is 10, then I can say s . name and I can assign
some name. Like this, I can access all members. This is just for one student. So, similarly we can have
for various students and we can deal with their information in our program. So,
One more example for a structure I will take and show you.
So next example I take an example for playing cards. A deck of playing cards will have some properties.
It will have a face value.
Let us say kings of hearts.
So there is a face value.
And this will have color, that is a red color and also shape is hearts. Any playing card can be defined
in terms of three properties. First is, face value, then face value can start from 1 onwards. 1 means,
let us call it as ACE, so, ACE, then 2, 3, 4, 5, . . . .  10 . then a J is 11, and Queen is 12
and King as 13.
So these are the face value from 1 to 13. Then, next is shapes are there.
So what are the shapes?
There are 4 shapes, like Hearts, Diamonds, Spades, and Club. So, 4 shapes are there.
So let us define the shapes in terms of codes. We will give code
for them.
Let us say 0,
is for club.
So this club will be like this, right.
And 1 is for spade.
So this is Spade.
Alright, then, 3 is for diamond.
Let us take it as Diamond, and 4 is for hearts.
So let us define these as shapes. So for each shape,
I have given a number. Now, next thing is color.
So as there are only two colors, I will define colors also in terms of codes.
Let us say 0 for black color and 1 for red color.
So 1 for the red color.
So black and red color.
So this is how we can define a playing card. Now ,this I can represent it as a structure. Let us define a
structure; struct card ;  What are the members?
All these are integers only now. First one is
is int face ; and the second one is int shape ; and the third one is int color
int color
this is how we can define a playing card.
So this is the definition. Then, how much space is it taking?
Suppose, if I say, int type is taking 2 bytes, so total 6 bytes of memory it is taking. This is just our definition
of a card.
Now let us declare a variable. So, inside main ( ) , if I declare a variable of this type of
structure, so I can have a playing card, struct card c . This c, how it will occupy the memory?
it will have three members, first one is a face, and the second one is shape, right?
And the third one is color. Now you can access all these members by using a dot operator, I can say,
c . face = 1 , next, c . shape = 0.
So this is for club. Now, c . color = 0 . This is black color definitely.
So this is 0 .
So this how I can create a variable of datatype structure, and I can initialize its member. So, this will be
1 0 0 . So, you can see that I am using dot operator.
Otherwise; Let us forget this.
Otherwise I can directly initialize also. struct card c , I can directly initialize the value, that is
first, face value is 1 , and then, shape is 0 , and the color is also 0.
So, this is declaration plus initialization. And, inside the memory it will be here, like c will have 3 members,
1 0 0 0 . It will be inside the stack, that is belonging to main ( ) , or the stack frame belonging
to the main ( ) .
Now, one more thing, I'll just remove this and show you one more thing.
See, inside the main ( ) , I want to have a deck of cards, so, total there will be 52 cards.
This is the definition of a card.
So just for one card.
Likewise I want 52 cards so I can declare a variable,
struct card ,
Now, this is the structure name, and now variable name,
I will call it as deck of size 52. This will form an array of structures.
This is important.
Array of structures. so I'll be having 52 such structures. So, one structure is taking 6 bytes,
Total how many bytes will it take? It will be taking, 52 * 6 bytes. So, 312 bytes it
will take.
So I'll get 52 different cards. Now,
Each card I can access it with the help of its index.
Even I can initialize this array of structures.
So if I want to initialize it, for a few cards I will do. First one, first card is ACE of club
and black color.
This is first card then second, that is card 2, face value is 2,
and this is club and color is 0 , so on. I can fill this one. Now, afterwards, if suppose I want to start
filling the other colors, or, other shapes like
ACE of spade and the color is 0, right. Then card value is 2 and it is a spade.
So next is color is 0.
So this is face value and this is shape and this is color.
So like this I can fill up all 52 cards if I want to initialize them.
So we can initialize an array of structures like this.
This is the first structure, and second structure and so on.
So in this way we can initialize array of structures if I want to access them individually, like the
first card I want to display, then I can use dot operator.
So let us print just a face value of first card, printf ("%d", deck[0] . face )
That is the second, so it will show face of the first card then,
printf ("%d", deck[0] . shape ) So, I can display shape.
That's it. I can display other things also, like color also
I can display. So, this how by using array name, then index,
Then I can access it.
So here we have learned,
How do you find a structure.,
How to declare an array of structure, and how to initialize, if you want to initialize then, how to access
of the members.
So this I'll be giving a demonstration also.
This is sufficient right now for the structure. More about structures, that is pointer to a structure
and the parameter of the structure, we will be learning them in coming videos.